readme.md, before:

ECSAST - A Language Compiler Using ECS for the AST
====================================================

ECSAST is a small compiled language implemented in Rust. Its distinguishing
feature is that the Abstract Syntax Tree uses an Entity-Component-System (ECS)
pattern: every AST node is just an ID, and all data about nodes lives in
separate hash-map stores (kinds, spans, types, etc.).

The compiler produces native binaries via Cranelift.


Prerequisites
-------------

- Rust toolchain (rustup.rs) — edition 2024, rustc 1.90+
- A C compiler (cc) on your PATH — used to link the output binary
- macOS or Linux


Quick Start
-----------

1. Build the compiler:

    cargo build

2. Compile and run an example program:

    cargo run -- examples/hello.ecs
    ./output

   You should see: Hello, world!

3. Use -o to choose the output binary name:

    cargo run -- examples/fizzbuzz.ecs -o fizz
    ./fizz

4. Enable optimizations with -O:

    cargo run -- examples/add.ecs -o add -O speed
    ./add


Writing Programs
----------------

Source files use the .ecs extension. The language is statically typed with
C-like syntax. Every program needs a fn main() entry point.

Example (examples/fibonacci.ecs):

    fn fibonacci(n: int) -> int {
        if n <= 1 {
            return n;
        }
        return fibonacci(n - 1) + fibonacci(n - 2);
    }

    fn main() {
        print(fibonacci(10));
    }

Supported features:
  - Types: int, bool, str (float is parsed but not yet in codegen)
  - Arithmetic: + - * / %
  - Comparison: == != < <= > >=
  - Logical: && || !
  - Variables: let x: int = 42;
  - Assignment: x = x + 1;
  - Control flow: if/else, while, return
  - Functions: fn name(params) -> ReturnType { body }
  - Inline functions: inline fn name(params) -> ReturnType { body }
  - Built-ins: print() works with int, bool, and str values
  - Command-line args: argc() returns argument count, arg(i) for use in print()

Inline Functions
----------------

Mark a function with the `inline` keyword to have Cranelift inline it at
every call site. This eliminates call overhead for small helper functions:

    inline fn add(a: int, b: int) -> int {
        return a + b;
    }

    fn main() {
        print(add(3, 4));
    }

When compiled with -O speed, the add call is fully inlined and the optimizer
can constant-fold the result.

Optimization Levels
-------------------

The compiler supports three optimization levels via the -O flag:

    cargo run -- <FILE> -O none           # no optimizations (default)
    cargo run -- <FILE> -O speed          # optimize for execution speed
    cargo run -- <FILE> -O speed-and-size # optimize for speed and code size


Project Layout
--------------

    src/
      main.rs         CLI entry point (clap-based argument parsing)
      lib.rs          Library root, re-exports modules
      lexer.rs        Tokenizer: source text -> Vec<Token>
      parser.rs       Recursive-descent parser with precedence climbing
      ast.rs          NodeId, NodeKind, AstWorld (the ECS store)
      codegen.rs      Cranelift-based native code generation
      passes.rs       Tree-walk annotation passes (currently unused)
      interpreter.rs  Tree-walking interpreter (alternative to codegen)
      printer.rs      Debug pretty-printer for the AST
      span.rs         Byte-range source locations

    examples/         Example .ecs programs you can compile and run
    tests/
      compile_and_run.rs  End-to-end codegen tests (compile + run binary)
      interpreter.rs      Interpreter tests (parse + interpret in-process)
      programs/           Shared test fixtures (source.ecs + expected_output)


Running Tests
-------------

    cargo test           # run all tests (parser + codegen + interpreter)
    cargo test -- <name> # run a single test by name substring
    cargo clippy         # check for lint warnings


How the Compiler Works
----------------------

The pipeline is:

    .ecs source file
         |
         v
    Lexer (lexer.rs) -- produces a list of tokens
         |
         v
    Parser (parser.rs) -- builds AstWorld with node kinds and spans
         |
         v
    Codegen (codegen.rs) -- two-pass Cranelift compilation:
       1. Declare all functions (enables forward references)
       2. Define each function body as Cranelift IR
       3. Inline marked functions at call sites via ctx.inline()
         |
         v
    Linker (cc) -- links object file with a small C runtime
         |
         v
    Native binary (./output or custom name via -o)

The C runtime provides print_int(), print_str(), and argument access functions
so the built-ins work. It is compiled and linked automatically — you don't
need to do anything special.


Architecture Note: Why ECS?
----------------------------

Traditional compilers store AST data directly in tree nodes. ECSAST instead
gives each node just an integer ID (NodeId) and stores all properties in
separate HashMap<NodeId, X> "component stores":

    kinds:    what kind of node it is (FnDecl, BinOp, IfStmt, etc.)
    spans:    source location (byte range)
    types:    type information (filled by analysis passes)
    parents:  parent pointers (filled by analysis passes)

This makes it easy to add new compiler passes without modifying existing
data structures — each pass just writes to its own store.

Commit message:

docs: update README to reflect slotmap replacing HashMap stores
Replace all mentions of HashMap with the actual slotmap types in use
(SlotMap, SecondaryMap, SparseSecondaryMap). Add an explanation in the
architecture section covering why slotmap was chosen over HashMap:
cache-friendly O(1) array-indexed lookups and generational keys that
catch stale NodeId references.

https://claude.ai/code/session_017yk6ENnFnD2qKVDcvRWH5M

readme.md, after:

ECSAST - A Language Compiler Using ECS for the AST
====================================================

ECSAST is a small compiled language implemented in Rust. Its distinguishing
feature is that the Abstract Syntax Tree uses an Entity-Component-System (ECS)
pattern: every AST node is just an ID, and all data about nodes lives in
separate slotmap stores (kinds, spans, types, etc.).

The compiler produces native binaries via Cranelift.


Prerequisites
-------------

- Rust toolchain (rustup.rs) — edition 2024, rustc 1.90+
- A C compiler (cc) on your PATH — used to link the output binary
- macOS or Linux


Quick Start
-----------

1. Build the compiler:

    cargo build

2. Compile and run an example program:

    cargo run -- examples/hello.ecs
    ./output

   You should see: Hello, world!

3. Use -o to choose the output binary name:

    cargo run -- examples/fizzbuzz.ecs -o fizz
    ./fizz

4. Enable optimizations with -O:

    cargo run -- examples/add.ecs -o add -O speed
    ./add


Writing Programs
----------------

Source files use the .ecs extension. The language is statically typed with
C-like syntax. Every program needs a fn main() entry point.

Example (examples/fibonacci.ecs):

    fn fibonacci(n: int) -> int {
        if n <= 1 {
            return n;
        }
        return fibonacci(n - 1) + fibonacci(n - 2);
    }

    fn main() {
        print(fibonacci(10));
    }

Supported features:
  - Types: int, bool, str (float is parsed but not yet in codegen)
  - Arithmetic: + - * / %
  - Comparison: == != < <= > >=
  - Logical: && || !
  - Variables: let x: int = 42;
  - Assignment: x = x + 1;
  - Control flow: if/else, while, return
  - Functions: fn name(params) -> ReturnType { body }
  - Inline functions: inline fn name(params) -> ReturnType { body }
  - Built-ins: print() works with int, bool, and str values
  - Command-line args: argc() returns argument count, arg(i) for use in print()

Inline Functions
----------------

Mark a function with the `inline` keyword to have Cranelift inline it at
every call site. This eliminates call overhead for small helper functions:

    inline fn add(a: int, b: int) -> int {
        return a + b;
    }

    fn main() {
        print(add(3, 4));
    }

When compiled with -O speed, the add call is fully inlined and the optimizer
can constant-fold the result.

Optimization Levels
-------------------

The compiler supports three optimization levels via the -O flag:

    cargo run -- <FILE> -O none           # no optimizations (default)
    cargo run -- <FILE> -O speed          # optimize for execution speed
    cargo run -- <FILE> -O speed-and-size # optimize for speed and code size


Project Layout
--------------

    src/
      main.rs         CLI entry point (clap-based argument parsing)
      lib.rs          Library root, re-exports modules
      lexer.rs        Tokenizer: source text -> Vec<Token>
      parser.rs       Recursive-descent parser with precedence climbing
      ast.rs          NodeId, NodeKind, AstWorld (the ECS store)
      codegen.rs      Cranelift-based native code generation
      passes.rs       Tree-walk annotation passes (currently unused)
      interpreter.rs  Tree-walking interpreter (alternative to codegen)
      printer.rs      Debug pretty-printer for the AST
      span.rs         Byte-range source locations

    examples/         Example .ecs programs you can compile and run
    tests/
      compile_and_run.rs  End-to-end codegen tests (compile + run binary)
      interpreter.rs      Interpreter tests (parse + interpret in-process)
      programs/           Shared test fixtures (source.ecs + expected_output)


Running Tests
-------------

    cargo test           # run all tests (parser + codegen + interpreter)
    cargo test -- <name> # run a single test by name substring
    cargo clippy         # check for lint warnings


How the Compiler Works
----------------------

The pipeline is:

    .ecs source file
         |
         v
    Lexer (lexer.rs) -- produces a list of tokens
         |
         v
    Parser (parser.rs) -- builds AstWorld with node kinds and spans
         |
         v
    Codegen (codegen.rs) -- two-pass Cranelift compilation:
       1. Declare all functions (enables forward references)
       2. Define each function body as Cranelift IR
       3. Inline marked functions at call sites via ctx.inline()
         |
         v
    Linker (cc) -- links object file with a small C runtime
         |
         v
    Native binary (./output or custom name via -o)

The C runtime provides print_int(), print_str(), and argument access functions
so the built-ins work. It is compiled and linked automatically — you don't
need to do anything special.


Architecture Note: Why ECS?
----------------------------

Traditional compilers store AST data directly in tree nodes. ECSAST instead
gives each node just an integer ID (NodeId) and stores all properties in
separate slotmap "component stores":

    kinds:    SlotMap<NodeId, NodeKind>          — what kind of node it is
    spans:    SecondaryMap<NodeId, Span>          — source location (byte range)
    types:    SparseSecondaryMap<NodeId, TypeInfo>— type info (filled by passes)
    parents:  SecondaryMap<NodeId, NodeId>        — parent pointers (filled by passes)

SlotMap is used instead of HashMap for two reasons:

  1. Performance: SlotMap uses a dense array indexed by the slot's integer
     index, so lookups are O(1) without any hashing. SecondaryMap (used for
     eagerly-populated stores like spans) shares the same layout and is
     equally fast. SparseSecondaryMap (used for sparsely-populated stores
     like types) falls back to a hash map internally but is still keyed by
     the same NodeId type.

  2. Safety: SlotMap keys carry a generation counter. If a node were ever
     removed and its slot reused, any old NodeId would be detected as stale
     rather than silently returning the wrong node. This prevents a class of
     dangling-reference bugs at zero runtime cost for the common (no-removal)
     case.

This makes it easy to add new compiler passes without modifying existing
data structures — each pass just writes to its own store.
